https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-018-2667-0

Bias against research on gender bias

Aleksandra Cislak¹ • Magdalena Formanowicz² • Tamar Saguy³

Received: 3 July 2017 / Published online: 17 February 2018

 The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication

Abstract The bias against women in academia is a documented phenomenon that has 
had
detrimental consequences, not only for women, but also for the quality of 
science. First,
gender bias in academia affects female scientists, resulting in their 
underrepresentation in

academic institutions, particularly in higher ranks. The second type of gender 
bias in
science relates to some findings applying only to male participants, which 
produces biased
knowledge. Here, we identify a third potentially powerful source of gender bias 
in aca-
demia: the bias against research on gender bias. In a bibliometric 
investigation covering a
broad range of social sciences, we analyzed published articles on gender bias 
and race bias
and established that articles on gender bias are funded less often and 
published in journals
with a lower Impact Factor than articles on comparable instances of social 
discrimination.
This result suggests the possibility of an underappreciation of the phenomenon 
of gender
bias and related research within the academic community. Addressing this 
meta-bias is
crucial for the further examination of gender inequality, which severely 
affects many
women across the world.

Keywords Impact factor Gender-science stereotype Gender discrimination
Bibliometric analysis

Aleksandra Cislak and Magdalena Formanowicz have contributed equally to the 
manuscript.

& Magdalena Formanowicz
magda.formanowicz@gmail.com

¹  Psychology Department, Nicolaus Copernicus University, Torun´, Poland

²  Department of Psychology, University of Bern, Fabrikstrasse 8, 3012 Bern, 
Switzerland

³  Psychology Department, Interdisciplinary Center (IDC) Herzliya, Herzliya, 
Israel


Introduction

Science it would seem is not sexless; she is a man, a father and infected too. 
(Woolf
1938/2015, p. 212)

Since Virginia Woolf made this statement, many changes have transpired. Gender 
bias in
academia and science has been acknowledged (European Commission 2016a; Francisco
2007; Ritz et al. 2014), and intense measures have been taken to overcome it 
(for example,
the National Science Foundation’s ADVANCE program aiming to increase the number 
of
female scientists in academic STEM careers). However, despite the gender 
equality
policies implemented in academia and society, the chances of women achieving
professorships have hardly improved over the past 20 years (Danell and Hjerm 
2013).
Not surprisingly, women continue to be underrepresented in academic 
institutions,
especially in higher ranks and decision-making bodies (European Commission 
2016b) and
in editorial boards (Cho et al. 2014). Women are also paid less than men (Shen 
2013), and
their research is less likely to receive funding (Ley and Hamilton 2008). 
Importantly, these
differences cannot be attributed to levels of commitment or achievement 
(Wennera˚s and
Wold 1997). In a study comparing promotion patterns, it was established that 
despite the
similar productivity of men and women at the level of associated professor, men 
were still
more likely to get promoted to full professorships (Carter et al. 2017). As 
such, it is likely
that the gender gap in academia is due to the perceived lack of fit between 
scientific roles
and being a woman (Eagly 1987; Smyth and Nosek 2015). Accordingly, it is ten 
times
more common for female authors to be incorrectly cited as males than for male 
researchers
to be misattributed as female (Krawczyk 2017). Similarly, studies have shown 
that when
all other factors were held constant, women were less likely to be hired than 
men for the
role of lab manager (Moss-Racusin et al. 2012) and that their research was 
devalued
(Larivie`re et al. 2013).

Another type of gender bias in science relates to scientific investigations. As 
scientific
inquiries often disregard the moderating roles of sex or gender, some findings 
apply mostly
to male participants, producing biased knowledge. This can be detrimental, as 
findings
pertinent to men may be irrelevant and, in the worst cases, harmful for women. 
For
example, women’s underrepresentation as subjects in medical research may have 
grave
consequences for women’s health (Correa-de-Araujo 2006).

In this research we focus on yet another type of gender bias in science, one 
that pertains
to the very topics of scientific inquires. Particularly, we investigated a bias 
that is directed
toward scientific efforts devoted to exposing and probing the phenomena of 
gender bias.
We aim to verify whether gender bias as a topic of scientific investigation may 
be a subject
of a biased evaluation resulting in fewer and less prestigious publications and 
fewer
funding opportunities. Recent evidence suggests that men, relative to women, 
judge studies
on gender discrimination less favorably (Handley et al. 2015). We here extend 
this evi-
dence in important ways. First, by employing a bibliometric analysis we focus 
on outcomes
that go beyond self-report ratings of valence to reflect consequential outcomes 
as they
naturally occur in the field. Second, we consider the real-life scientific 
evaluations of
research on gender bias in comparison to the analogous evaluations of research 
on an
equivalent instance of social bias (for the two other biases toward female 
scientists and
participants, the point of comparison was their male counterparts). Here, 
research on race
bias constitutes a suitable point of reference. First, both race and gender are 
the most
salient social categories and are both categorized in the early stages of 
information pro-
cessing (Ito and Urland 2003). Related to this, discrimination based on these 
two categories


forms the most recognizable and identifiable cases of social injustice, and, 
most likely for
that reason, they are both named first in international documents referring to 
human rights.
Finally, these two biases are investigated within the same disciplines, with 
researchers
being trained in the same principles and methods and, by consequence, targeting 
similar
choices for grant and publication outlets. Moreover, as men and women undertake 
similar
research topics within psychology (Ko¨nig et al. 2015), it is likely that the 
gender com-
position of the team dealing with each topic is balanced.

Considering that no discrimination is less or more important than any other 
form of
discrimination and that both biases are investigated with the same methodology, 
the bias
against the examination of gender bias shall have no objective reason. One 
potential
argument against studying gender discrimination could be bias-driven itself, 
stereotyping
gender topics as ‘‘feminine,’’ and, as such, less valuable (Williams et al. 
2010) and per-
ceived as relatively incompetent and unscientific (Crawley 2014; Eagly 1987; 
Nosek et al.
2009). As competence is especially important for the evaluation of scientific 
merit (Madera
et al. 2009), women-oriented research can seem less persuasive.

Another possible reason for disregarding gender over race in social science 
could be
related to the availability heuristic (Tversky and Kahneman 1974). When looking 
at the
conference halls or the departmental staff of many universities (not taking 
rank into
account), at least half of the crowd are women (National Science Foundation 
2015).
Moreover, everybody can provide an example of a woman who has succeeded in her 
career
or an example of real or perceived gender equality from their own house, 
neighborhood, or
office. With this anchor, it appears that gender equality has already been 
achieved, and this
might be sufficient to refute the phenomenon of gender bias or, at least, limit 
its potential
impact. Race bias, however, provides many fewer viable examples. In science and 
in
politics, there are still large discrepancies between the numbers of black and 
white scholars
(National Center for Education Statistics 2014; Hopkins et al. 2013), and 
inter-racial
contacts are far less frequent than inter-gender ones (Ridgeway and Smith-Lovin 
1999).
Following the logic of the availability heuristic, this might lead to 
conclusions of stronger
(or more real) discrimination.

Drawing on these ideas, we propose that studying gender bias may meet with lower
appreciation within the scientific community in comparison to studying race 
bias. We
predict that this manifests in relatively lower appreciation in peer-review 
outcomes,
reflected in less grant funding and fewer publications in prestigious journals 
for research on
gender bias. Our goal in the current research was to provide the first evidence 
for this
hypothesis by means of a bibliometric analysis. We compared articles that refer 
to gender
bias to articles published on racial bias in terms of two types of peer-review 
outcomes:
their Impact Factor and having grant support.

Method

Sample of articles

Using the EBSCO search engine, we retrieved all the peer-reviewed articles that 
used the
keywords gender bias; gender discrimination, gender prejudice and sexism versus 
race/
racial bias; race/racial discrimination, and race/racial prejudice and racism 
in their titles
and that were listed in PsycINFO and PsycARTICLES databases covering 2534 
journals.
The timeframe of publication was set to 2008–2015. This timeframe choice was 
dictated


by the availability of Impact Factor indexes through the library services 
accessible to the
authors. Yet, this timeframe choice allowed the identification of more than 
half of all the
articles that were ever published and matched the search criteria (prior to 
2008, N = 1445;
in years 2008–2015, N = 1485). As the shares of gender- and race-related issues 
were
virtually the same in both periods of time (31.65% of articles published prior 
to 2008 and
31.71% of articles published between 2008 and 2015 referred to gender bias), we 
consider
the chosen sample a representative sample of articles on race and gender 
bias/prejudice/
discrimination. We identified 1485 articles published in 520 journals. Each 
article was

assigned a numerical value based on the type of bias it referred to (race = 0; 
gender = 1).
The full dataset with all the identified articles can be found in the 
Supplemental Online
Materials (https://osf.io/y9tfv/).

Duplicates that were not automatically removed were manually removed (43 
duplicates
and 5 reprints). Additionally, we removed articles loading in two categories 
(52 articles
had both gender and race terms in their titles), 1 non-English article, 9 
errata, and 1
retracted article and its retraction note. Abstracts were inspected, and 39 
articles regarding
instances of non-social discrimination or bias (such as articles regarding 
own-gender or
own-race bias in facial discrimination) were excluded.

Moreover, given the focus of the investigation on research on gender bias, we 
included
in the database empirical articles using both qualitative and quantitative 
methodologies.
Articles were identified as empirical or not through the PsycINFO 
meta-information. On
rare occasions in which the PsycINFO meta-information was missing, the two 
first authors
listed for this paper reached a decision by consensus. In total 282 articles 
were identified as
non-empirical, such as commentaries, interviews, letters, literature reviews 
(but not meta-
analyses), editorials, and book reviews. Given that such articles do not report 
on original
research, often follow a different review process, and are seldom the basis of 
a grant
application, we did not include them in the final sample. The information for 
four articles
was missing, so they were also not included in the final sample.

Impact factor and funding

We chose two peer-review criteria. The first was Impact Factor. Despite debates 
on
whether Impact Factor values reflect the quality of science published in 
journals (Garfield
1996), it is still commonly recognized as reflecting the prestige of the 
journals, scientific
impact, and broader public outreach (Perneger 2010). Each article was assigned 
a five-year
Impact Factor value obtained for the respective journal from the Web of 
Science. In 185
cases, the Impact Factor indicators were unavailable for the year the selected 
articles were
published. The five-year Impact Factor values ranged from .23 to 31.05 (M = 
2.47;

SD = 2.14). The preliminary analyses showed that the distribution of the 
five-year Impact

Factor values was strongly skewed, and we identified two outliers with z-scores 
equal to

13.38. These outliers were articles published in Science. As this journal 
clearly belonged to
a different population of top journals (which are unusually highly cited and in 
which
acceptance decisions are made using different criteria than in other general 
journals), these
observations were excluded from the analysis. Both of the excluded papers 
referred to race
bias. The second indicator of peer review was information on whether the 
selected article
was supported by funding (0 = no; 1 = yes). This information was available from 
the
PsycINFO and PsycARTICLES databases.


Journals and methods

We acknowledge that articles on gender/race bias might be sent not only to 
general interest
journals but also to journals devoted to examining either gender or race 
inequalities. In
general interest journals, articles on gender/race bias compete with all the 
other articles.
Notably, research probing gender phenomena is published by journals with lower 
impact
factors when it is explicitly labeled as ‘‘gender studies,’’ thus seemingly 
narrowing the
scope of the article (Madison et al. 2016; see also Lundgren et al. 2015). In 
specialized
journals, the publication of an article with merit that is aligned with a 
journal’s scope might
be relatively easier. To control for that possibility, we included an 
additional coding that
indicated whether the article was published in a general interest or 
specialized journal. One
hundred fifteen papers on gender bias were published in 15 specialized journals 
dedicated
to gender issues, such as Gender & Society, Sex Roles, or Psychology of Women 
Quarterly.
One hundred fourteen papers on race bias were published in 25 specialized 
journals, of
which 13 were dedicated to race issues, such as Ethnic and Racial Studies, 
Journal of
Black Psychology, Journal of Black Studies, or Race and Social Problems, and 12 
to
gender issues, such as European Journal of Women’s Studies or Women’s Studies 
Inter-
national Forum. The general summary of articles published on gender and race is 
pre-
sented in Table 1.

Furthermore, for all the empirical papers, the methodologies employed in the 
studies
either qualitative or quantitative were recorded. The latter classification was 
based on the
possibility that research on gender bias might be done using qualitative 
methods due to a
feminist tradition that questions the objectivity of quantitative methods 
(Eagly and Riger
2014). As most of the journals cited within the scope of this bibliometric 
analysis pre-
dominantly publish papers using quantitative methodology (Eagly and Riger 
2014), and
given that qualitative research may be less funded than quantitative research 
(Carey and
Swanson 2003; Morse 1999), controlling for the method used in the studies is 
crucial in
establishing whether or not bias against research on gender bias is an artifact 
of the type of
methodology possibly preferred in gender bias research. The summary of the 
empirical
articles published on gender and race for papers using either qualitative or 
quantitative
methods is presented in Table 2.

Authorships

In order to account for bias against female authors, we also considered the 
gender com-
position of the research teams. To that end, we first determined each author’s 
gender by the
first name’s gender stereotypicality or through a web search of departmental or 
private
webpages, pictures, or other on-line records. In the case of twelve articles we 
could not
assign gender of the authors due to lack of sufficient records.

Table 1 General descriptive statistics for articles on gender and race bias


Type of
bias

Number of
articles

Number of
funded articles

Number of articles in
general journals

Mean 5-year
IF (SD)

Mean % of female
authors (SD)

Gender  355     142       240           2.09 (1.31)   66.42 (33.01)

Race   691     314       577           2.58 (1.77)   56.31 (36.20)


Table 2 Descriptive statistics for empirical articles on gender and race bias 
presented for papers employing either qualitative or quantitative methods
Qualitative articles                        Quantitative articles


Number
of
articles

Number of
funded
articles

Number of articles
in general journals

Mean

5-year IF
(SD)

Mean % of
female authors
(SD)

Number
of
articles

Number of
funded
articles

Number of articles
in general journals

Mean

5-year IF
(SD)

Mean % of
female authors
(SD)

Gender  27     7       22         1.63 (.86)  84.04 (29.09)   328    135      
218         2.12 (1.33)  65.02 (32.94)

Race   176    51       139         1.45 (.81)  62.37 (41.92)   515    263      
438         2.92 (1.83)  54.20 (33.78)


As the rules regarding the relationship between the order of authors’ names and 
their
relative input vary across disciplines (in some disciplines, the norm is to 
arrange authors’
names in an alphabetical order; in other disciplines, the most prestigious 
authorship
position can be first or last), we decided to use the authorship gender 
indicator that would
not be directly affected by a discipline’s rules in our analysis. Following 
Naldi and Parenti
(2002; see also Kretschmer et al. 2012), we computed the Contribution 
bibliometric
indicator—the percentage of women in each author team.

Results

In order to examine the existence of bias against gender bias as a scientific 
topic, we
conducted a regression analysis with two indicators of peer review as dependent 
variables.
As predictors, we used the type of bias studied and the percentage of women in 
the
research teams. All the correlation coefficients are listed in Table 3.

It is important to note that the cases were non-independent because some papers 
were
published by the same journals, and this implies similar editorial policies and 
contingent
five-year Impact Factor values. Therefore, in the final analyses, conducted 
using the MPlus
program (Muthe´n and Muthe´n 2012), we nested papers in journals to obtain a 
robust
standard error estimation.

As illustrated in Fig. 1, research on gender bias was funded less often (B = - 
.20;
SE = .09; p = .02) and published in lower Impact Factor journals (B = - .67; SE 
= .20;
p = .001). Importantly, including the percentage of females in the research 
teams as a
covariate in the model showed that this percentage was not significantly 
related to financial
support (p = .76) or to the prestige of the journal (p = .35). When those two 
nonsignif-
icant parameters were constrained to 0, the final model fitted the data very 
well, v²
(2) = 1.81; p = .40.

In an additional analysis, we have added the type of journal (general versus 
specialized)

as a covariate. Yet, the inclusion of a covariate did not affect the predicted 
results pattern.
The type of bias remained a significant predictor of both funding and Impact 
Factor. When
we used the gender of the first author instead of the percentage of female 
authors as a
predictor, interestingly, papers with women as first authors had a higher 
likelihood of being
funded (B = .19; SE = .08; p = .02). Yet, the pattern of the role of 
methodology and,
more importantly, the topic of investigation remained unchallenged.

Table 3 Correlation coefficients for the variables used in the study

Variable                   2    3     4     5      6

1. Type of bias (0 = race; 1 = gender)    - .05^ - .14***   .13***   .21*** - 
.18***
2. Grant (0 = no; 1 = yes)              .25*** - .03    .15*** - .001

3. 5 - year IF                     - .09*    .26***   .26***

4. % of Female authors                      - .07*  - .13***

5. Type of method (0 = Qual; 1 = Quant)                   - .01

6. Type of journal (0 = specialty; 1 = general)

^p = .10; *p \ .05; **p \ .01; ***p \ .001


Fig. 1 The tested model involving grant funding and Impact Factors as dependent 
variables and type of
bias, percentage of female authors, and method as predictors. The first number 
represent an unstandardized
coefficient, followed by its standard error. Dotted lines represent 
non-significant paths

Discussion

Articles on gender discrimination were funded less often and published in less 
prestigious
journals than papers on racial discrimination. Considering that the percentage 
of women in
the author pool had a virtually null effect on both grant acquisition and the 
Impact Factor,
this effect cannot be explained in terms of the gender of the researchers. So, 
what are the
possible causes of this effect? Although we controlled for the type of methods 
used in the
studies in the analysis, we cannot rule out the possibility that the articles 
on gender bias
were of a different quality than the articles on race bias. This is, however, 
unlikely for the
following reasons. First, as mentioned before, both gender and race bias are 
investigated
within the same fields using similar methods and paradigms. It is rather 
unlikely that
researchers who deal with gender research are less experienced or were trained 
in worse
schools than researchers on race bias. Even less likely is that they used 
flawed method-
ology on purpose. Moreover, all the analyzed articles passed peer-review 
screening, which
is considered a quality watchdog within the scientific community. Finally, the 
Impact
Factor index is not a measure of the quality of individual research articles. 
As indicated in
the San Francisco Declaration of Assessment of Research, it shall not be used 
as such, nor
to assess individual scientists’ contributions or in hiring, promotion, or 
funding decisions.
The Impact Factor was introduced to help librarians make decisions about 
popular journals
within the field (Garfield 1996). All of the above suggest that bias against 
research on
gender bias is not merit based but a reflection of a topic’s lower prestige and 
appreciation
due to a generalized gender bias (as outlined in the introduction).

Another potential alternative explanation for the observed differences in grant 
funding
for racial and gender bias research is the relative difference in the 
availability of participant
samples. Recruiting racially diverse samples may be more difficult, 
time-consuming, and


costly, while recruiting gender-diverse samples may be less of a problem, 
thereby
necessitating less funding for recruitment. Future research should probe whether
researchers studying gender bias are less eager to apply for funding or the 
gender bias
applications are less likely to be funded, mirroring the effect of a female 
grant authorship
(Ley and Hamilton 2008). It seems less plausible, though, that the availability 
of partici-
pant samples may affect the teams’ decisions regarding the outlet for their 
work. Admit-
tedly, the current bibliometric analysis does not allow for the determination 
of whether the
research programs on gender bias are submitted to (and, as a consequence, also 
published
by) less prestigious journals or are rejected by more prestigious journals. If 
the first
explanation is correct, it either implies that researchers are aware of the 
existence of bias
against gender bias research among academic community or that they consider 
their own
work less suitable for more prestigious journals, thus perpetuating the 
existing arrange-
ments. The second mechanism—the rejection by more prestigious journals—would be 
in
line with previous research on the existence of subtle bias in the perceived 
quality of
studies evidencing gender discrimination (Handley et al. 2015). Given that 
abstracts on
gender bias research were evaluated less positively by male reviewers (Handley, 
et al.
2015), one possible explanation for the obtained result is that the research on 
gender bias is
more often reviewed by male researchers than research on race bias. With the 
available
dataset, we cannot rule out that possibility. However, considering that the 
pool of
reviewers, due to common editorial strategies, is likely to be similar to the 
author pool (for
gender research, comprising 66% women, and for race research, 56% women) this 
seems
rather unlikely. Nevertheless, future research could examine whether the type 
of dis-
crimination (gender versus race) is sent to reviewers of different genders and 
whether this
relationship varies by the journal’s prestige.

Implications

The reported bias is a potentially powerful phenomenon because it might be 
invisible to the
scientific community and, as such, overlooked (Blair et al. 2004; Carnes et al. 
2012;
Devine et al. 2017) and not taken care of (in contrast to the first and second 
types of bias
mentioned in the introduction, for which corrective measures have been 
applied). By
raising the awareness of the existence of bias against research on gender bias 
among male
researchers (Handley et al. 2015) and in general as a topic of scientific 
inquiry, as in our
study, we hope to contribute to the discussion about the fairness of journal 
policies. This
discussion is primarily important in order for gender bias to be properly 
acknowledged
within the scientific community and to pursue further examination of this 
powerful source
of inequality that severely affects many women in the world (UN Women 2015). 
Gender
bias intersects with social standing, resulting in a feminization of poverty 
(Starrels et al.
1994). In addition, it intersects with race bias in academic communities 
(Gutie´rrez y Muhs
et al. 2012; Hopkins et al. 2013) and elsewhere (Livingston et al. 2012; United 
Nations
Division for the Advancement of Women [DAW], Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights [OHCHR], United Nations Development Fund for Women [UNIFEM]
2000). Finally, addressing this meta-bias within academia will strengthen the 
scientific
community and its ability to expose and overcome bias and to maintain its 
powerful ability
to inform organizational, national-level, and international policies and 
decision-making
processes.

Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Alice Eagly on her suggestion 
about including
qualitative versus quantitative distinction in the analysis and Ilan Roziner 
for his helpful statistical advice.


We would like to help also the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments 
on the previous versions
of this article.

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 Inter-
national License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the 
original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes 
were made.

References

Blair, I. V., Judd, C. M., & Chapleau, K. M. (2004). The influence of 
Afrocentric facial features in criminal
sentencing. Psychological Science, 15, 674–679. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00739.x.

Carey, M. A., & Swanson, J. (2003). Funding for qualitative research. 
Qualitative Health Research, 13,

852–856. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732303013006006.

Carnes, M., Devine, P. G., Isaac, C., Manwell, L. B., Ford, C. E., 
Byars-Winston, A., et al. (2012).
Promoting institutional change through bias literacy. Journal of Diversity in 
Higher Education, 5,
63–77. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0028128.

Carter, T. E., Smith, T. E., & Osteen, P. J. (2017). Gender comparisons of 
social work faculty using h-index
scores. Scientometrics, 111, 1547–1557. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-017-2287-0.

Cho, A. H., Johnson, S. A., Schuman, C. E., Adler, J. M., Gonzalez, O., Graves, 
S. J., et al. (2014). Women
are underrepresented on the editorial boards of journals in environmental 
biology and natural resource
management. PeerJ, 2, e542. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.542.

Correa-de-Araujo, R. (2006). Serious gaps: How the lack of sex/gender-based 
research impairs health.

Journal of Women’s Health, 15, 1116–1122. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/jwh.2006.15.1116.

Crawley, D. (2014). Gender and perceptions of occupational prestige: Changes 
over 20 years. SAGE Open,
4, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244013518923.

Danell, R., & Hjerm, M. (2013). Career prospects for female university 
researchers have not improved.

Scientometrics, 94, 999–1006. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-012-0840-4.

Devine, P. G., Forscher, P. S., Cox, W. T. L., Kaatz, A., Sheridan, J., & 
Carnes, M. (2017). A gender bias
habit-breaking intervention led to increased hiring of female faculty in STEMM 
departments. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 73, 211–215. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2017.07.002.

Eagly, A. H. (1987). Sex differences in social behavior: A social-role 
interpretation. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawr-
ence Erlbaum.

Eagly, A. H., & Riger, S. (2014). Feminism and psychology: Critiques of methods 
and epistemology.

American Psychologist, 69, 685–702. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0037372.

European Commission. (2016a). Horizon 2020. Promoting gender equality in 
research and innovation.
Retrieved from: 
https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/en/h2020-section/promoting-gender-
equality-research-and-innovation

European Commission. (2016b). She figures 2015 [online report]. Retrieved from: 
https://ec.europa.eu/
research/swafs/pdf/pub_gender_equality/she_figures_2015-final.pdf

Francisco, J. G. (2007). Summary report: Women’s studies/gender research 
meeting [online report].
Retrieved from: 
http://www.unesco.org/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/SHS/pdf/Summary-Report-
QuezonCity.pdf

Garfield, E. (1996). Fortnightly review: How can impact factors be improved? 
BMJ, 313, 411–413. https://
doi.org/10.1136/bmj.313.7054.411.

Gutie´rrez y Muhs, G. G., Niemann, Y. F., Gonza´lez, C. G., & Harris, A. P. 
(2012). Presumed incompetent:
The intersections of race and class for women in academia. Boulder, CO: 
University Press of
Colorado.

Handley, I. M., Brown, E. R., Moss-Racusin, C. A., & Smith, J. L. (2015). 
Quality of evidence revealing
subtle gender biases in science is in the eye of the beholder. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of
Sciences, 112, 13201–13206. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1510649112.

Hopkins, A. L., Jawitz, J. W., McCarty, C., Goldman, A., & Basu, N. B. (2013). 
Disparities in publication
patterns by gender, race and ethnicity based on a survey of a random sample of 
authors. Scientometrics,
96, 515–534. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-012-0893-4.

Ito, T. A., & Urland, G. R. (2003). Race and gender on the brain: 
Electrocortical measures of attention to the
race and gender of multiply categorizable individuals. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology,
85, 616–626. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.85.4.616.


Ko¨nig, C. J., Fell, C. B., Kellnhofer, L., & Schui, G. (2015). Are there 
gender differences among researchers
from industrial/organizational psychology? Scientometrics, 105, 1931–1952. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11192-015-1646-y.

Krawczyk, M. (2017). Are all researchers male? Gender misattributions in 
citations. Scientometrics, 110,

1397–1402. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-016-2192-y.

Kretschmer, H., Kundra, R., Beaver, D., & Kretschmer, T. (2012). Gender bias in 
journals of gender studies.

Scientometrics, 93, 135–150. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-012-0661-5.

Larivie`re, V., Ni, C., Gingras, Y., Cronin, B., & Sugimoto, C. R. (2013). 
Bibliometrics: Global gender
disparities in science. Nature, 504, 211–213. https://doi.org/10.1038/504211a.

Ley, T. J., & Hamilton, B. H. (2008). The gender gap in NIH grant applications. 
Science, 322, 1472–1474.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1165878.

Livingston, R. W., Rosette, A. S., & Washington, E. F. (2012). Can an agentic 
Black woman get ahead? The
impact of race and interpersonal dominance on perceptions of female leaders. 
Psychological Science,
23, 354–358. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797611428079.

Lundgren, S., Shildrick, M., & Lawrence, D. (2015). Rethinking bibliometric 
data concerning gender
studies: A response to So¨derlund and Madison. Scientometrics, 105, 1389–1398. 
https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11192-015-1767-3.

Madera, J. M., Hebl, M. R., & Martin, R. C. (2009). Gender and letters of 
recommendation for academia:
Agentic and communal differences. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94, 1591–1599. 
https://doi.org/10.
1037/a0016539.

Madison, G., & So¨derlund, T. (2016). Can gender studies be studied? Reply to 
comments on So¨derlund and
Madison. Scientometrics, 108, 329–335. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-016-1963-9.

Morse, J. M. (1999). Qualitative generalizability. Qualitative Health Research, 
9, 5–6. https://doi.org/10.

1177/104973299129121622.

Moss-Racusin, C. A., Dovidio, J. F., Brescoll, V. L., Graham, M. J., & 
Handelsman, J. (2012). Science
faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male students. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences,
109, 16474–16479. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1211286109.

Muthe´n, L. K., & Muthe´n, B. O. (2012). MPlus. Statistical analysis with 
latent variables user’s guide (7th
ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Muthe´n & Muthe´n.

Naldi, F., & Parenti, I.V. (2002). Scientific and technological performance by 
gender: A feasibility study on
patent and bibliometric indicators. Volume II: methodological report. European 
Commission
Research, EUR 20309.

National Center for Education Statistics. (2014). Postsecondary education in 
digest of education statistics
2014, chapter 3. National Center for Education Statistics, U.S. Department of 
Education

National Science Foundation. (2015). NSF/NIH/USED/USDA/NEH/NASA 2013 Survey of 
Earned Doctor-
ates, special tabulation. National Center for Science and Engineering 
Statistics.

Nosek, B. A., Smyth, F. L., Sriram, N., Lindner, N. M., Devos, T., Ayala, A., 
et al. (2009). National
differences in gender-science stereotypes predict national sex differences in 
science and math
achievement. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 10593–10597. 
https://doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.0809921106.

Perneger, T. V. (2010). Citation analysis of identical consensus statements 
revealed journal-related bias.

Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 63, 660–664. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2009.09.012.

Ridgeway, C. L., & Smith-Lovin, L. (1999). The gender system and interaction. 
Annual Review of Soci-
ology, 25, 191–216. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.25.1.191.

Ritz, S. A., Antle, D. M., Cote, J., Deroy, K., Fraleigh, N., Messing, K., et 
al. (2014). First steps for
integrating sex and gender considerations into basic experimental biomedical 
research. The FASEB
Journal, 28, 4–13. https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.13-233395.

Shen, H. (2013). Inequality quantified: Mind the gender gap. Nature, 495, 
22–24. https://doi.org/10.1038/
495022a.

Smyth, F. L., & Nosek, B. A. (2015). On the gender–science stereotypes held by 
scientists: Explicit accord
with gender-ratios, implicit accord with scientific identity. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 6, 415. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00415.

So¨derlund, T., & Madison, G. (2015). Characteristics of gender studies 
publications: A bibliometric analysis
based on a Swedish population database. Scientometrics, 105, 1347–1387. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11192-015-1702-7.

Starrels, M. E., Bould, S., & Nicholas, L. J. (1994). The feminization of 
poverty in the United States:
Gender, race, ethnicity, and family factors. Journal of Family Issues, 15, 
590–607. https://doi.org/10.
1177/019251394015004005.

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and 
biases. Science, 185,

1124–1131. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.185.4157.1124.


UN Women. (2015). Progress of the world’s women 2015–2016: Transforming 
economies, realizing rights.
United Nations Division for the Advancement of Women (DAW), Office of the High 
Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR), United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM). 
(2000).
Gender and racial discrimination report of the expert group meeting.

Wennera˚s, C., & Wold, A. (1997). Nepotism and sexism in peer-review. Nature, 
387, 341–343. https://doi.
org/10.1038/387341a0.

Williams, M. J., Levy Paluck, E., & Spencer-Rodgers, J. (2010). The masculinity 
of money: Automatic
stereotypes predict gender differences in estimated salaries. Psychology of 
Women Quarterly, 34, 7–20.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-6402.2009.01537.x.

Woolf, V. (1938/2015). A room of one’s own. Three guineas. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

